# Explainable Arrhythmia Detection With Wavelet Features for Intra-Patient and Inter-Patient ECG Classification
### Introduction
Early detection of arrhythmia is crucial in managing cardiac health in medicine. This is often done manually and on a beat-by-beat basis, thereby making real time monitoring in some critical cases signicantly challenging to human experts. In this project, we propose the use a decision tree(DT) machine learning model to classify and predict heart rhythms based on wavelet features for early diagnosis. This is particularly important in realtime, long-term monitoring of patients in resource constrained environements. Medical data is characteristcally very limited due to regulation and privacy rules. This makes the choice of DT models very attractive, as they generally do not require massive data to train, unlike neural network based models.

Another fundamental motivation for this approach is the critical need for clinical interpretability and transparency required in medical diagnosis. While deep learning models have been shown to effectively analyse Electrocardiogram (ECG) signals, they provide limited information to professionals on why they succeed or fail in most cases. Such blackbox models are particularly problematic in cardiology, where a diagnosis must be backed with physiological eveidence. By crafting wavelet features from the signals to define their spectral properties at the different resolutions or decomposition levels, we aim to detect arrhythmia in heart rhythms with reasonable accuracy. The model is therefore trained to learn which features are relavant to detect what heart conditions, and which magnitudes can be set as permissible limits.

To evaluate our model, results from two training scenarios are observed. One where some part of the patient's data is available during training (intra-patient mode). This is useful for models deployed online, where the they are continuously trained wih the data of the patient. A typical example would be in wearable devices, where they are personalised or customized to the user's specific ECG information. The other scenario is where the patient's data have been excluded from training entirely (inter-patient mode). This is often regarded as a more "realistic" setting or, in this case, the offline setting. In this case the model is trained as a one-size-fits all, where the model is trained only once on a given, and then applied to a various other samples that may not have been available during training.

In order to understand how much peformance gain or cost is achieved, the results are evaluated against two other classifiers namely logistic regression(LR) and XGBOOST(XGB). The results from the LR classifier provide a baseline performance to compare with our proposed DT model. This helps to highlight how much accuracy is gained by this choice while maintaining and even improving transparency with neglible tradeoff in portability. On the other hand, the XGB results provide the strong benchmark from blackbox models (XGBOOST), to also evaluate the performance cost of the proposed DT model where interpretability and portability is not a material constraint.